JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: From
his income
taxes to his foundation, Donald
Trump faces
a string of controversies, while
Hillary Clinton
talks economics on the trail.
Then: In a shocking vote, voters
in Colombia
reject a landmark peace deal
with rebels that
would have ended five decades of
conflict.
And as ISIS clings to its last
major base
in Iraq, joint forces team up to
take back
the city of Mosul and push the
terrorist group
out of the country forever.
JANE FERGUSON: This road is the
front line
before getting to
ISIS-controlled Mosul, and
all along the front line here,
it is divided
up between the various groups
who are fighting
ISIS.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: ahead of
tomorrow night's
debate, a look at the two vice
presidential
nominees and what to expect in a
Mike Pence/Tim
Kaine showdown.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thirty-six days
to go, and
the Trump campaign is struggling
again to
get back on message.
Instead, questions about Donald
Trump's taxes,
treatment of women and even his
charity swirled
today, and his opponent was
quick to strike.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: Hillary Clinton
pounced on reports
that Donald Trump might have
avoid income
taxes because of business losses
to suggest
he may not be the businessman he
says he is.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Yesterday, his campaign was
bragging it makes
him a genius.
(LAUGHTER)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Here's
my question.
What kind of genius loses a
billion dollars
in a single year?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: This is
Trump to a
T. He's taking corporate excess
and made a
business model out of it.
JOHN YANG: The New York Times
published part
of Trump's 1995 federal tax
return showing
that he declared a loss of $916
million from
real estate and other business
failures.
That could have legally allowed
him to avoid
paying income taxes for 18
years.
The Clinton campaign quickly
produced a TV
ad on the issue.
NARRATOR: A new report shows he
may not have
paid any federal taxes for
almost 20 years.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: He
didn't pay any
federal income tax.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
That makes me smart.
NARRATOR: If he thinks that
makes him smart,
what does he think of you?
JOHN YANG: Late today at a rally
in Colorado,
Trump fired back.
DONALD TRUMP: As a businessman
and real estate
developer, I have legally used
the tax laws
to my benefit and to the benefit
of my company,
my investors and my employees.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: I mean, honestly,
I have brilliantly
-- I have brilliantly used those
laws.
I have often said, on the
campaign trail,
that I have a fiduciary
responsibility to
pay no more tax than is legally
required,
like anybody else, or, to put it
another way,
to pay as little tax as legally
possible.
JOHN YANG: The Republican
nominee is under
fire on several other fronts,
including allegation
that he routinely demeaned women
on his reality
TV show "The Apprentice."
The Associated Press reported
Trump asked
some female contestants to wear
shorter dresses,
openly discussed which ones he
would like
to sleep with, and made lewd
comments about
women on the show and on the
crew.
And the New York state attorney
general, a
Democrat who is backing Clinton,
ordered the
Trump Foundation to stop
fund-raising in the
state, saying it's not properly
registered.
In addition, Trump was
criticized for comments
made about PTSD sufferers at a
forum with
veterans in Virginia.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
When you talk about the mental
health problems,
when people come back from war
and combat
and they see things that maybe a
lot of the
folks in this room have seen
many times over,
and you're strong and you can
handle it, but
a lot of people can't handle it.
JOHN YANG: Later, the Marine who
asked the
question said he found Trump's
answer thoughtful
and understanding.
Republican vice presidential
hopeful Mike
Pence campaigned in Virginia.
Democratic running mate Tim
Kaine was off
the campaign trail.
They meet tomorrow night for
their one and
only debate.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: U.S.
relations with Russia hit a new
low today.
Washington called off talks with
Moscow on
the conflict in Syria, amid
fierce air attacks
on the city of Aleppo.
The State Department said the
Russians failed
to keep commitments they made in
a cease-fire
deal.
ELIZABETH TRUDEAU, State
Department Spokesperson:
Russia and the Syrian regime
have chosen to
pursue a military course
inconsistent with
the cessation of hostilities, as
demonstrated
by intensified attacks against
civilian area,
targeting of critical
infrastructure such
as hospitals, preventing
humanitarian aid
from reaching civilians in need.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Earlier, Russian
President
Vladimir Putin suspended a deal
with the U.S.
on disposing of weapons-grade
plutonium.
He cited unfriendly actions and
U.S. failure
to meet its obligations under
the agreement.
Hurricane Matthew bore down on
Haiti, with
winds of 140 miles per hour and
up to 40 inches
of rain.
It's one of the strongest
Atlantic storms
in recent years.
And, late today, it was centered
about 230
miles southwest of
Port-au-Prince, the Haitian
capital.
Outer bands of wind and rain
were already
battering the impoverished
country's southwestern
tip.
The eye is expected to pass
near, or over,
that area late tonight.
The state of Ohio will resume
executing condemned
prisoners in January.
That follows an unofficial
three-year moratorium
due to shortages of lethal
drugs.
But, today, the state attorney
general's office
said that it now has a new
three-drug combination.
Attorneys for death row inmates
immediately
said they will file a new court
challenge.
Los Angeles police are facing
protests over
a fatal shooting on Saturday.
Officers say they chased and
ultimately killed
an 18-year-old black man,
Carnell Snell, after
he jumped from a car that had
faulty license
plates.
The incident sparked protests
last night.
But, today, police Chief Charlie
Beck said
that Snell had a loaded weapon.
CHARLIE BECK, Los Angeles,
California, Police
Chief: At one point during their
foot pursuit,
which was 200 to 300 yards in
total, they
observed him remove a handgun
from his waistband
and hold it in his left hand.
And while holding the handgun in
his left
hand, he turned in the direction
of the pursuing
officers, at which time an
officer-involved
shooting occurred.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Beck also
defended police actions
in a second fatal shooting.
He said a Hispanic man pointed
what turned
out to be a replica handgun at
officers, and
they opened fire.
The U.S. Supreme Court opened
its fall term
today, and refused a White House
appeal to
rehear a key immigration case.
In June, the court tie-voted on
the president's
policy of shielding millions of
immigrants
from deportation.
So, a lower court ruling against
the plan
remains in effect.
The court has had only eight
members since
Justice Antonin Scalia died in
March.
This was Black Monday in Poland,
with thousands
of women wearing black and
protesting against
a bill imposing a total ban on
abortion.
Demonstrators nationwide shut
down businesses
and government offices and
blocked roads.
Later, they held a huge rally in
Warsaw.
Poland is heavily Catholic, and
already has
one of the most restrictive
abortion laws
in Europe.
A Japanese biologist has won
this year's Nobel
Prize in medicine.
Yoshinori Ohsumi was honored
today for discoveries
on how cells break down and
recycle.
His work in the 1990s may now
aid research
on fighting cancer, Alzheimer's
and other
diseases.
In Japan today, Ohsumi said he
never imagined
that his experiments with yeast
would mean
a Nobel.
YOSHINORI OHSUMI, Nobel Prize
Winner (through
translator): There is one thing
I would like
to stress.
When I began this research,
there was no assurance
whatsoever that it would lead to
some connection
with cancer or human longevity.
That's not why I started.
Such is the nature of how
fundamental research
unfolds, and I stress the
importance of the
fundamentals of science.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Along with a
Nobel medal, Ohsumi
receives prize money worth
$930,000.
And on Wall Street today, the
Dow Jones industrial
average lost 54 points to close
below 18254.
The Nasdaq fell 11, and the S&P
500 slipped
seven.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a shocking
result, Colombia voters reject a
deal to end
50 years of war; the impending
battle to recapture
Mosul from the Islamic State; a
heated race
for New Hampshire's Senate seat;
and much
more.
Now to a major upset in South
America.
Yesterday, voters in Colombia
rejected a peace
deal between their government
and the largest
rebel group, known as the FARC.
It was hoped the deal would put
an end to
50-plus years of conflict that's
left hundreds
of thousands of people dead.
William Brangham has the latest.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Sunday's
stunning outcome
in Colombia touched off
celebrations in parts
of Bogota.
Voters narrowly rejected a peace
accord with
the Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia,
or FARC, this despite
predictions it would
win easily.
CLAUDIA, Colombia (through
translator): We
have all been victims of the
FARC and this
victory is calling to the
government to renegotiate
the agreements, not to hand over
the country
to the FARC.
It's very emotional.
This is what Colombia wants.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But yes-voters
complained
opponents of the peace deal were
misguided.
ANTONIO SANGUINO, Colombia
(through translator):
Fifty percent of the people who
went out to
vote allowed themselves to be
convinced by
a message of hate, a message of
revenge, a
message of keeping us in the
past.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The government
and the leftist
rebels signed the peace pact one
week ago
after four years of
negotiations.
It would formally end a conflict
that's claimed
at least 220,000 lives since the
1960s, and
displaced millions more, but it
still needed
ratification.
After Sunday's rejection,
President Juan Manuel
Santos and the top FARC
commander appealed
for calm.
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS, Colombian
President (through
translator): I call on those who
decided to
or not to support the agreement
to end the
conflict with the FARC.
Now we are all together, going
to decide between
the path that we should take so
that peace
is possible.
I will not give up.
TIMOCHENKO, FARC Leader (through
translator):
The FARC maintains its
willingness for peace
and reiterates its position to
use only words
as weapons to work towards the
future.
The Colombian people who dream
of peace, you
can count on us.
Peace will win out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Even former
President Alvaro
Uribe, a leader of the no
campaign, warned
against reprisals.
ALVARO URIBE, Former Colombian
President (through
translator): We all want peace.
Nobody wants violence.
We ask that the FARC are
protected and that
all crimes, including drug
trafficking and
extortion, are stopped.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The United
States had backed
the accord, and, today, a White
House spokesman
voiced hope.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
The good news is that all sides
including
the voters, I think, are still
focused on
trying to reach this negotiated
peace, and
that certainly is within the
national security
interests of the United States
to end this
war, and we are going to
encourage all sides
to pursue that peace.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For now, a
cease-fire remains
in effect, as negotiators ponder
the way forward.
To help us understand the future
of this peace
process, we're joined now by
someone intimately
involved in securing the deal in
the first
place.
Bernard Aronson is the U.S.
special envoy
for talks between the Colombian
government
and the FARC rebels.
Welcome.
Fifty years of fighting.
Hundreds of thousands of people
have been
killed, millions of people
pushed out of their
homes.
Why did voters reject this peace
plan?
BERNARD ARONSON, U.S. Special
Envoy for the
Colombian Peace Process: Well, I
think the
woman who spoke about it in your
introduction
spoke for a lot of Colombians,
which is they
have suffered enormously, they
have been victimized,
they're bitter about that,
rightfully so,
and they felt the FARC got off
too easy in
this peace accord.
Whether that's true or not is up
to debate,
but many Colombians felt that
way and they
turned out, and, by a very small
majority,
rejected the accord.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A very, very
small majority,
I mean, 50 to 49, almost.
Pick up that idea, though.
The argument that many of them
made is that
the FARC were involved in drug
trafficking,
killings, kidnappings,
extortion, and to them
this deal felt like the FARC was
able to walk
away scot-free.
Is that a legitimate criticism?
BERNARD ARONSON: It isn't true
that they were
going to wake away scot-free.
What the agreement did was set
up a system
of justice called transitional
justice.
All the FARC members who were
accused of war
crimes, atrocities or atrocities
or violations
of international human rights
had to go before
these tribunals, confess all of
their crimes,
all their criminal activity,
give up any gains
they made from it, and then
subject themselves
to sanctions by the court, which
included
restrictions on liberty, though
maybe not
prison, per se, and some kind of
sanction
of work.
They have been sentenced to
spend five or
eight years removing land mines.
But the people in Colombia whose
family were
kidnapped and who were killed or
driven off
their land, and they felt that
that wasn't
an appropriate punishment.
And that's part of the
discussion that has
to go forward now between the
government and
the opposition.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, what
does happen at
this point?
I mean, before this vote was
held, the government
said if the vote goes no, we're
not coming
back to the negotiating table.
The FARC said the same thing.
So, where does the leave the
peace process?
BERNARD ARONSON: Well, but you
just heard
President Santos, in fact, say,
they are going
to try to renegotiate.
I think what he wants to do, and
what he's
doing correctly, is try to reach
out to a
broad spectrum of Colombian
political leadership,
including the no campaign, which
obviously
has to have a seat at the table
now, and see
if they can come up with some
new consensus
that they can start to discuss
with the FARC.
Whether they will get there or
not is an open
question, but it's certainly
worth an effort.
And this president has been
pretty relentless
in his pursuit of peace.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But do you
think the FARC
-- and you know many of these
leaders.
You have worked with them
intimately over
the years.
Do you think they are going to
tolerate a
further conversation where all
of a sudden
the government says, I know we
had a deal,
but now we have a new deal to
work out and
you guys are going to have to be
punished
more severely?
BERNARD ARONSON: Right.
It's not an easy sell.
On the other hand, if the
opposition can be
brought into the deal so that
there is a national
consensus behind it, that's good
for the peace
process, it's good for the FARC,
because,
with a country as divided as
Colombia is today,
to go forward with the
agreement, you would
have made it a political
football for the
opposition.
It could be obstructed and torn
apart.
And this way, the hope is -- and
it's a hope
at this point -- is that you can
create a
national consensus which will be
enduring
and will unite the country.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's say that
it does forward
and there is some sort of
process reignited.
One of the things I know that
was an issue
at this was the FARC rebels to
disarm and
some of their soldiers would
then be reintegrated
into Colombian society.
My understanding is, many of
these are very,
very young people.
How does someone who's lived
their entire
life as a guerrilla soldier
suddenly put down
arms and reintegrate into
society?
BERNARD ARONSON: Well, Colombia
actually has
a long history over the last 20
or 30 years
of reintegrating and
demobilizing guerrilla
forces.
But what they do is a very sort
of systematic
approach with a presidential
institute.
They teach these young fighters
to read and
write, if they're not literate.
They teach them a job skill.
They reunite them with their
families.
They provide housing.
They often provide direct entree
to a job
opportunity.
It's not 100 percent foolproof,
but they actually
have a pretty good track record
of demobilizing
guerrilla forces.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You are
someone who's worked
in this region for decades and
you know the
players involved intimately.
Today, in the light of this
vote, do you have
any sense of hope that this is a
chance that
this is going to be restarted in
a meaningful
way?
BERNARD ARONSON: Colombians on
the yes vote
and the Colombians on the no
vote want peace.
They don't want to go back to
war.
They want a negotiated
settlement.
So, I don't think it's
impossible the Colombians
can come together on a new
consensus.
Getting the FARC to give up what
they had
and go to a different set of
agreements is
not going to be easy, but they
don't have
other options either.
They don't want to go back to
war, and war
is not an option for them.
So this is an uphill fight, but
getting to
the peace accords was a very
long and torturous
process.
So, this is well worth the
effort.
President Santos wants to do
this.
The United States obviously
support him.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Bernard Aronson,
thank you very much for being
here.
BERNARD ARONSON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the first of
three reports
this week on the fight for Iraq.
Thirteen years after the U.S.
military invasion,
the country still struggles to
stand on its
own, as it faces profound
challenges, none
more dire than the threat posed
by the Islamic
State, which controls parts of
the country.
Tonight, in partnership with the
Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting,
special correspondent
Jane Ferguson and producer Jon
Gerberg look
at the coming crucial battle to
reclaim the
city of Mosul from ISIS and to
drive it from
Iraq once and for all.
JANE FERGUSON: Hungry and
crushed together
in the punishing sun, these
Iraqis, refugees
in their own land, desperately
grasp for food.
They have fled south of Mosul
City, where
fighting between government
forces and ISIS
has been raging for months.
New offensives have ISIS in
retreat, but with
their homes, and all they know,
engulfed in
the battle, they have come here.
Escaping from Mosul just days
ago, this woman
says she and her family of seven
were lucky
to get away.
Running away from ISIS is
dangerous, and she
didn't want to be identified.
WOMAN (through translator):
There are many
people who want to leave, but
cannot.
The ones they catch, they break
their legs.
They just use a block on the
sidewalk and
break their legs.
If the person has already gone
very far, they
just kill them.
JANE FERGUSON: We are 60 miles
south of Mosul.
Just up the road, these troops
are fighting
the ISIS insurgency.
Iraqi special forces have
already pushed ISIS
from many areas of the country.
The battles have been tough,
destroying almost
everything in sight.
The Iraqi army has fought for
months over
these areas south of Mosul City,
swathes of
land and villages just like this
that they
have been pushed out of.
But even though they retook this
land several
months ago, civilians have yet
to return.
These soldiers now have their
sites set north,
planning to take back the city
of Mosul, the
Islamic State's last remaining
major urban
base in Iraq.
At 23, Mahmoud has fought and
won several
battles against the group.
And these men are ready to take
Mosul.
MAN (through translator): By
God, my morale
is high.
Praise be to God.
Praise and thanks be to God.
We will kick is from Mosul.
JANE FERGUSON: That confidence
is a major
turnaround from just two years
ago.
Then, ISIS rushed into Iraq from
Syria and
swept down these very roads, as
the Iraqi
army collapsed and ran away.
It was a humiliating shock for
the country's
security forces.
ISIS declared their conquest a
new caliphate,
or Muslim empire, with the
capital based in
Raqqa, Syria, only 140 miles
from the border.
It was from Mosul that the
group's leader,
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, first
appeared in public,
preaching in the city's Grand
Mosque, demanding
obedience from Muslims around
the world.
For the past year, Iraq's
military has been
fighting back, retaking former
ISIS strongholds
of Fallujah and Ramadi.
Now the Iraqi military is
planning a showdown
with ISIS in Mosul, a battle
they hope will
push the group out of the
country.
Iraqi special forces commander
General Maan
al-Saadi, believes is will soon
be on the
run.
GENERAL MAAN AL-SAADI, Iraqi
Special Forces
Commander (through translator):
No one accepts
them, whether civilian or
military.
We are living in the 21st
century.
Who would accept bloody savages
and killers?
JANE FERGUSON: Across Iraq, the
U.S. leads
a coalition of 19 countries
fighting ISIS,
but the push to retake Mosul
will be an Iraqi
military effort, with U.S.
military support.
American airstrikes, guided by
the precision
of surveillance drones, have
already hammered
ISIS for more than two years.
Heavy vehicles, and attack
helicopters, designed
to press the fight on the
ground, can already
be seen on U.S. bases here.
And last week, the Pentagon
announced an additional
600 U.S. troops are heading to
Iraq, bringing
the number of American boots on
the ground
to more than 5,000.
But the Americans will not be on
the front
lines.
That task falls to these regular
Iraqi troops.
They have already fought ISIS in
other, smaller
cities, and now each soldier is
getting a
month of extra training for the
tough door-to-door
urban warfare expected in Mosul.
It will be a huge test for these
men, with
Da'esh, as they call ISIS here,
likely to
challenge their fighting skills
more than
ever before.
To prepare for the variety of
threats, roadside
bombs, booby traps, suicide car
bombs and
more, coalition partners from
the Australian
military are training these
young fighters.
They have a clear, limited goal.
COL.
ANDREW LOWE, Australian Army:
When you only
have four weeks of training,
it's important
to keep in the back of our minds
is that we
are not training them to be like
us.
We are training them to be what
they need
to be to defeat Da'esh.
So, what we say in the training
role, amongst
the task group, is, make them
better than
Da'esh.
JANE FERGUSON: Iraqi soldiers
alone cannot
defeat ISIS.
The upcoming battle for Mosul
will involve
a complex mix of fighting
groups, some at
odds with one another.
Iranian-backed Shia militias,
like these currently
on the front line near Tikrit,
will be another
fighting element.
Accused of taking orders from
Shiite commanders
in Tehran, they are blamed for
stirring sectarian
tensions in Sunni areas.
Mosul is a largely Sunni city,
and their participation
in the upcoming fight has been
politically
divisive.
Iran-backed fighters allied with
U.S.-backed
forces reflect the reality of
Iraq today.
There are many players who have
found a common
goal in defeating ISIS, but it's
often the
only thing uniting them.
In Northern Iraq, Peshmerga
forces from the
semi-autonomous Kurdish region
near Mosul
will also play a role in the
fight for the
city.
They have been at odds with the
Baghdad government
for decades, seeking
independence and a country
of their own.
They also see parts of Mosul as
rightly theirs.
This young Kurdish fighter told
us what motivates
him
NEZAR ESMAEL MUSTAFA, Kurdish
Fighter (through
translator): This is for our
future, for the
future of Kurdistan.
It is an honor and we will give
our lives
for this cause.
JANE FERGUSON: But the Kurdish
fighters, also
trained by and allied with the
U.S.-led coalition,
don't want the Shia militias
joining the fight.
Their spokesman told "PBS
NewsHour" plainly,
the Kurds do not approve.
BRIG.
GEN.
HALGURD HIKMAT, MD-UL /Peshmerga
Spokesman
(through translator): The Shia
militias are
foreigners to the people of that
area.
They have no relations with the
land and the
people.
If they participate, they will
create conflict.
JANE FERGUSON: This is where the
battle for
Mosul will begin.
Qayyarah, a small town just 35
miles south
of Mosul, was occupied by ISIS
until they
were pushed out just over a
month ago.
Now some signs of life are
returning.
At the entrance to the town, a
hand-painted
sign reads: "Here is Qayyarah,
the key to
liberating Mosul."
ISIS set fire to Qayyarah oil
wells in retreat.
This road is the front line
before getting
to ISIS-controlled Mosul, and
all along the
front line here, it is divided
up between
the various groups who are
fighting ISIS.
It represents just how complex
the battle
for Mosul will be.
U.S. Major General Gary Volesky,
commander
of the Army's 101st Airborne
Division, knows
the difficulties involved in
getting Iraq's
combative factions to work
together.
"PBS NewsHour" traveled with the
general to
Qayyarah Air Field, destroyed by
ISIS as they
left here, he says.
This will be the major hub,
where U.S. support
troops and Iraqi forces will
work together
as the offensive gets under way.
MAJ.
GEN.
GARY VOLESKY, U.S. Army: All of
the stakeholders
recognize the importance of
Mosul.
I mean, we have been to meetings
with both
the Kurds, the Iraqis, a lot of
the different
stakeholders, if you will, and
they all understand
that they have got to come
together to defeat
Da'esh.
And that's what they are doing.
JANE FERGUSON: In 2003, during
the early days
of the American occupation here,
the 101st
Airborne was responsible for
Mosul.
Colonel Brett Sylvia knows that
role has now
changed.
COL.
BRETT SYLVIA, U.S. Army: I am a
soldier.
And there is no doubt that if
you ask me where
I wanted to be, it would be up
front, you
know, with a rifle in my hand
leading.
But that's not our role today.
Our role is to advise and assist
them.
And, to be honest with you, it
may very well
be the right strategy.
JANE FERGUSON: U.S. commanders
hope their
latest efforts will prevent
another 13 years
of bloodshed and fighting.
COL.
BRETT SYLVIA: I do have a son in
the military
now.
And I do think about it a lot,
about, what
I am doing today in order to be
able to create
a long-lasting stability, such
that he may
not have to come here?
JANE FERGUSON: Stability of any
kind has eluded
this land for so long that
refugees fleeing
Mosul will have to survive in
places like
this.
As many as a million civilians
live in Mosul
City right now.
When they flee, the humanitarian
crisis could
accelerate from grave to
disaster.
Camps are already stretched
beyond capacity.
The United Nations is
frantically trying to
expand this facility to absorb
the expected
new arrivals.
MAN: It is also going to start
to be raining,
and the winter season is going
to make any
construction a lot more
challenging and the
living conditions a lot more
difficult.
So it's really a race against
time.
JANE FERGUSON: Despite the
hardship, it's
better than living under ISIS
rule.
WOMAN (through translator): Life
is miserable
here, but better than where we
were before.
A price cannot be set for
freedom.
People's freedom is priceless.
JANE FERGUSON: How long they
must stay here
will depend on how the fight for
Mosul plays
out.
Defeating ISIS is a short-term
goal.
But once they have been pushed
out of the
city, keeping those who have
fought them from
turning on each other will be
the next challenge.
Their hatred of ISIS is the only
thing that
binds many of Iraq's fighting
forces together.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Qayyarah, Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
vice presidential
politics, a look at the
candidates' journeys
to the national stage; and a
preview of the
V.P. debate with our Politics
Monday duo.
But, first, we head to New
Hampshire, where
a tight race between Republican
Senator Kelly
Ayotte and her Democratic
challenger, the
current governor, Maggie Hassan,
will help
determine which party controls
the U.S. Senate.
Lisa Desjardins has the story.
LISA DESJARDINS: The start of
fall in New
Hampshire.
Along with the changing leaves
this year,
the Granite State is home to
something else
special, a contest between two
respected and
popular Senate candidates.
Republican U.S. Senator Kelly
Ayotte, out
gathering votes at an apple
festival this
weekend, is defending her seat.
Democratic Governor Maggie
Hassan, rallying
volunteers, is hoping to win it.
Polls show it is a toss-up race,
a sharp partisan
fight, even as both brandish
they are not.
GOV.
MAGGIE HASSAN (D), New
Hampshire: We passed
a bipartisan Medicaid expansion
program.
We froze in-state tuition at our
university
system, and actually lowered it
at our community
colleges.
SEN.
KELLY AYOTTE (R), New Hampshire:
I have one
of the most bipartisan records
in the Senate.
I have certainly been called a
problem-solver
by the independent group No
Labels, who I
have worked with.
LISA DESJARDINS: Both are former
lawyers,
both known for their work ethic.
Neither is flashy.
But Hassan charges Ayotte is too
conservative
for the state, in lockstep with
the GOP on
defunding Planned Parenthood,
overturning
Roe vs. Wade, and on guns.
GOV.
MAGGIE HASSAN: Whether it's
standing with
the gun lobby, rather than
expanding background
checks so that terrorists can't
get guns online
and at gun shows, or whether
it's standing
against a woman's right to make
her own health
care decisions, those decisions
of Senator
Ayotte, her positions and her
votes, really
have pulled us backwards.
LISA DESJARDINS: Ayotte stands
by her position
to ban most abortions as a
matter of faith,
adding she supports access to
more contraception.
She attacks Hassan on taxes, a
core issue
here.
SEN.
KELLY AYOTTE: In terms of taxes,
I'm someone
who focuses on low taxes, a
better tax climate
for individuals and small
businesses.
She has long record of
increasing taxes, not
only on small businesses, but on
campgrounds,
registration fees on the people
of New Hampshire.
LISA DESJARDINS: Hassan's tax
record is complicated.
She cut taxes for some, but
raised them for
others, citing urgent needs like
fighting
the opioid crisis.
Meanwhile, both candidates are
keeping their
party's presidential nominees at
arm's length.
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump
were both
in New Hampshire last week, but
neither Hassan
nor Ayotte joined them on stage.
Ayotte has said she's voting for
Trump, but
not endorsing him.
But how do the important people,
the voters,
see this?
Jim Jalbert runs a thriving
family-owned bus
company, C&J Bus, in Portsmouth.
Jalbert is a registered
Republican who doesn't
like Trump.
But between Ayotte and Hassan:
JIM JALBERT, President, C&J Bus:
If you look
at the two of them, they're both
really good
people.
LISA DESJARDINS: Jim has a lot
at stake.
He's worried about passing on
his business
to a third generation, his sons.
He's worried about taxes and
America's crumbling
roads.
JIM JALBERT: I don't vote for a
person based
on a single issue.
I vote for a person based on
what they're
going to do in total.
And I look at the two of them,
and I think
that Ayotte, with her demeanor
and her style,
will probably do more for New
Hampshire.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Hassan and
Democrats
would love a so-called Trump
drag on down-ballot
races, especially in a place
like New Hampshire
Norm Ornstein of the American
Enterprise institute
explains.
NORMAN ORNSTEIN, Resident
Scholar, American
Enterprise Institute: If the
Democrats can't
win in a purple state with a
large number
of highly educated voters who
are turned off
by Donald Trump, they're going
to have a much
more steeply uphill battle in
accomplishing
the goal of winning the Senate.
LISA DESJARDINS: Let's look at
the Senate
battle map.
To take over the Senate,
Democrats need to
gain four Senate seats if
Clinton is president
and her V.P. can break a tie, or
five seats
if Trump wins.
Democrats have a big advantage.
Look at the 10 most competitive
Senate seats.
Nine are red, held by
Republicans.
What is Democrats' best chance
at a Senate
takeover?
Well, sources in both parties
believe they
will pick up Illinois and
Wisconsin.
That would be two.
In North Carolina and Missouri,
incumbent
Republicans are on the ropes.
If they lose?
That's two more Democratic
pick-ups, for four
total.
But Democrats may lose Nevada,
or the presidency,
so they need to pick up at least
one more
seat from a toss-up state like
New Hampshire.
That battle is playing out at
the 140-year-old
Deerfield Fair.
It's a jumble of food and
politics.
Andrew Robertson is splitting
his ticket,
voting Clinton for president,
but for Senate?
ANDREW ROBERTSON, New Hampshire:
yes, I think
I'm probably likely to vote for
Senator Ayotte,
in large part because of her
experience.
LISA DESJARDINS: Others are an
equal mix.
CAROL WYNNE, New Hampshire: I
really admire
Maggie Hassan.
She appears to have incredible
work ethic
and a great heart.
MAN: Unenthusiastically, I am
supporting Ayotte.
LISA DESJARDINS: Why
unenthusiastically?
MAN: Well, basically because
Ayotte has not
been as supportive to the
Republican nominee
as she should be.
LISA DESJARDINS: Enthusiastic
support from
the Senate will be key to
passing the next
president's agenda, likely to
include several
Supreme Court nominations.
Norm Ornstein:
NORMAN ORNSTEIN: This year, I
really do believe
that the battle for control of
the Senate
is very close in importance to
that battle
for control of 1600 Pennsylvania
Avenue.
LISA DESJARDINS: Those high
stakes have meant
sky-high spending here in the
Granite State,
and not just from the
candidates, but from
dozens of outside groups.
They have flooded the airwaves
with tens of
millions of dollars in ads.
And that's in a state with just
over one million
people.
It's by far the most spending
per person of
any Senate race.
Ads from pro- and anti-gun
groups, from Planned
Parenthood, from big-money
groups on the left
and right all creating an
airwaves war, as
two popular candidates try to
outperform their
parties' presidential nominees.
This makes voter contact, in
this retail politics
state, pivotal.
And, there, Ayotte has a
challenge: Usually,
Senate and presidential
campaigns coordinate,
but not so with Republicans this
year.
Ayotte is on her own to identify
and get out
her voters.
All this means, right now, it's
any woman's
race.
For the "PBS NewsHour" I'm Lisa
Desjardins
in Portsmouth, New Hampshire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: From the Senate
to the vice
presidential race.
Indiana Governor Mike Pence and
Virginia Senator
Tim Kaine may not be as
well-known or as polarizing
as the candidates at the top of
the ticket.
In fact, polls show more than
one-third of
registered voters don't know
enough about
either of them to form an
opinion, this despite
the fact that, if Trump wins, he
would be
the oldest newly elected
president to take
office, while Clinton would be
the second
oldest.
Americans will have a chance to
compare the
two running mates when they face
off on the
debate stage tomorrow night in
Virginia.
We take a look now at how these
two competitors
got to where they are today.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
Are we going to let him get away
with it?
AUDIENCE: No!
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Absolutely not.
We can't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today, they
represent polar
opposites of the political
spectrum.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
I know that I know we will make
America great
again.
(APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But long before
they were vying
to be the nation's second in
command, Mike
Pence and Tim Kaine began their
path to politics
under strikingly similar
circumstances.
Both were sons of the Midwest,
in Pence's
case, Columbus, Indiana, raised
by a gas station
owner and a homemaker, in a
large Irish-Catholic
family.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE: I'm really just a
small-town boy
who grew up in Southern Indiana
with a big
family and a cornfield in the
backyard.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kaine grew up in
Kansas city,
Missouri, the elder of two
brothers, his father
a metalworker, his mother a
teacher.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: I wanted to be a man
for others,
somebody who fought for the
rights of others,
had others' back, would stand up
for others,
especially if others wouldn't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Catholic
Church played
an integral role in both men's
early lives.
The Jesuit-educated Kaine came
from a family
that he says cared very much
about the church,
and very little about politics.
Jeff Schapiro has covered Kaine
for The Richmond
Times-Dispatch for more than a
decade.
JEFF SCHAPIRO, The Richmond
Times-Dispatch:
I think the Jesuit connection is
important
for several reasons, most
notably the idea
of liberation theology, that
faith manifests
itself in political action.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Like Kaine, Pence
was a Catholic
school kid, serving as an altar
boy, sometimes
seven days a week.
The future GOP governor also had
an early
interest in politics, Democratic
politics,
says Maureen Groppe of The
Indianapolis Star.
MAUREEN GROPPE, The Indianapolis
Star: He
was a youth coordinator for the
Democratic
Party in his county at one
point.
He revered the Kennedys.
He had a bust of JFK.
He voted for Carter, but his
politics started
to change in college.
He said Ronald Reagan inspired
him to become
a Republican.
He thought that Reagan embodied
the ideals
of America that he was raised to
believe in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Both men went on
to study law.
But Kaine took a detour to
Honduras to work
with a Jesuit mission.
JEFF SCHAPIRO: Then, when he
indicated to
the Jesuits present there that
he was a law
student, he was told that that
was not necessarily
a skill that would be useful in
a Third World
country.
And he spent a year teaching
crafts, metalwork,
carpentry to youngsters at this
missionary.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: And it convinced me
that we have
got to advance opportunity and
equality for
everybody, no matter where they
come from,
how much money they have, what
they look like,
what accent they have, or who
they love.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: After law school,
the newly
wed Kaine settled in Richmond,
Virginia, to
be close to his wife's family
and launch his
legal career.
Pence did the same in his home
state, Indiana,
and mulled his next step.
MAUREEN GROPPE: When he was
thinking about
what he wanted to do with his
life, he thought
about his gifts, his talents,
and he thought
he had a gift for articulation
for advocacy.
And he wanted to try and use
that in some
way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After two failed
runs for Congress
in the '80s, that gift led Pence
to start
his own radio talk show.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE: And I'm supposed to
be a cynic.
I'm supposed to not appropriate
you people.
MAUREEN GROPPE: He said that his
show was
Rush Limbaugh on decaf.
And he also likes to say that
he's a conservative,
but he's not in a bad mood about
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also during this
time, Pence
moved away from his Catholic
upbringing, joining
an evangelical Christian church
in Indianapolis.
In 2000, Pence ran for Congress
again.
The third time was the charm.
He quickly earned a reputation
as a champion
for conservative causes, leading
the fight
to defund Planned Parenthood.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE: Millions of pro-life
Americans
shouldn't be asked to fund the
leading abortion
provider in the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he didn't
always fall in
line with the Republican Party's
leadership,
fighting against President
Bush's signature
education program and expansion
of Medicaid.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE: I rise on behalf of
the fringe
in America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As Pence built
his Washington
resume, Kaine was launching
himself into Virginia
politics.
First serving on city council,
Kaine went
on to become the first white
mayor of Richmond,
a majority-black city, in nearly
a decade.
JEFF SCHAPIRO: His relationship
with African-Americans
has been enduring.
And it manifests itself not just
in politics,
but in faith.
He and Anne Holton attend a
majority-black
African-American Roman Catholic
parish.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He went on to
serve as lieutenant
governor under then governor and
now fellow
Senator Mark Warner, and was
next elected
governor himself.
For Kaine, the 2008 financial
collapse and
the nation's worst mass
shooting, 32 dead
at Virginia Tech University,
would consume
his attention.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: As you wrestle with
your sadness,
as you wrestle with your own
feelings of anger
or confusion, as you wrestle
with the despair,
do not let hold of that spirit
of the community
that makes Virginia Tech such a
special place.
Do not lose hold of that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Although Governor
Kaine was
unable to convince a Republican
legislature
to adopt stricter background
checks following
the shooting, he did close a
loophole that
had permitted the mentally ill
to purchase
guns.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: I have always
believed that, however
you serve, what matters is
whether you actually
deliver results for people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Schapiro says
these experiences
helped Kaine hone his political
skills.
JEFF SCHAPIRO: He can be very
calculated.
He can be very cagey.
He has an acute sense of the
jugular.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kaine's political
star continued
to rise.
He helped Barack Obama win
Virginia in 2008,
was named national party chair
the next year,
and in 2012 ran for the Senate,
and won easily.
As Kaine entered Congress, Mike
Pence gave
up his House seat to run for
governor of Indiana.
His tenure has been rocky at
times.
In 2015, Pence signed and
defended a controversial
law that critics charged would
let businesses
discriminate against gays and
lesbians.
MAUREEN GROPPE: The business
community in
Indiana really rose up against
it.
And then, when he agreed to make
changes to
the law, that satisfied neither
side.
The conservatives thought he had
capitulated
and the other side thought that
the changes
didn't go far enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pence did earn
praise from
conservatives for implementing
significant
tax cuts and signing a stricter
state abortion
law.
Donald Trump tapped Pence to be
his running
mate just as he was mounting a
tough reelection
bid in Indiana.
Groppe says Pence is motivated
by aspirations
for higher office, but also by
his Christian
faith.
MAUREEN GROPPE: It's a central
part of his
life, and I think he also sees
it as a reason
why -- connected to what he's
doing in public
office.
He said he sees public service
as a calling.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE: I'm a Christian, a
conservative
and a Republican, in that order.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a similar
vein, Schapiro
says Kaine is driven by a belief
that politics
can be faith in action.
JEFF SCHAPIRO: Faith becomes
sort of the broad
umbrella under which Kaine
operates.
I don't know that it's the only
thing.
This is politics and government
as opportunities
for change, as instruments for
good.
This is what interests and
motivates Kaine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, as we look
forward to
tomorrow night's vice
presidential debate,
I'm joined by our Politics
Monday team, Amy
Walter of The Cook Political
Report and Tamara
Keith of NPR.
So, hello to both of you.
Only six weeks to go, tomorrow
counting, until
this election.
Let's talk about these vice
presidential candidates.
Amy, this is not a contest
that's generated
nearly as much, this debate,
interest as the
first presidential debate.
How much is at stake?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes.
It's almost impossible for these
two to generate
any more enthusiasm.
Right?
I mean, you have two candidates
in Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump that
have outsized
personalities, that suck up the
oxygen in
the room completely.
These two candidates haven't
just simply been
overshadowed when it comes to
the debates,
but they have been overshadowed
on the campaign
trail throughout the course of
this campaign.
And, as you pointed out, these
are already
two candidates that aren't
particularly known.
But, look, I think the stakes
are pretty high
here, especially for Mike Pence.
It is going to be his challenge
tomorrow night
to keep the attention away from
all the problems
that Donald Trump has had this
last week or
so, many of which have been
self-inflicted,
and to focus back on the issues
and the message
that Trump and the Trump
campaign would like
to be focused on, mainly to
prosecute the
case against Hillary Clinton,
Barack Obama
and the path forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, so, Tam, if
that's what
Mike Pence has to go, what does
Tim Kaine
have to do?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well,
he has to come out and not have
any sunlight
between himself and Hillary
Clinton, which
he has done a very good job of
falling in
line.
They didn't necessarily agree on
TPP, but,
by the time he was announced as
V.P., he -- they
agreed.
And I think also he intends to
come out and
try to show separation between
Mike Pence
and Donald Trump, and show that
there are
areas where Pence and Trump do
not see eye
to eye, where, you know, Pence
has said that
this isn't a name-calling kind
of campaign,
at the same time that Donald
Trump was calling
people names on Twitter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and we know
vice presidential
debates may get attention at the
time, but
ultimately they have not had a
great deal
of effect.
But we will see.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
No, I think there's still --
it's still going
to be an important discussion.
And the question is, for how
long will we
have this discussion?
Will by the next morning there
be another
tweetstorm or another front-page
story that
detracts us from what came out
of this debate?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you both
have referred
to Donald Trump's controversies
of the last
week, Tam, most recently over
his income taxes.
New York Times broke the story
over the weekend.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He lost over $900
million on
his -- indicated on his return,
in 1995, suggesting
he could have gone 18 years
without paying
any income taxes.
Is this something that's likely
to affect
this campaign?
TAMARA KEITH: This is a
fascinating question
to me.
The Hillary Clinton campaign is
already out
with an ad criticizing him about
this.
In the last debate, he said, "It
makes me
smart."
And the ad now says, if you're
smart, what
does that say about the rest of
us?
But Donald Trump is out today
saying, yes,
I took advantage of the system.
That's the system.
And I can fix it because I know
the system.
And this $900 million loss in a
single year
is part of his story.
It's part of the story that he's
been telling
about himself, that he went on
tough times
and then he built himself back
up and was
able to become this successful
businessman
once again from the ashes of his
previous
businesses.
So, it's unclear whether this
changes the
narrative in any way.
And it almost feeds the story
that Donald
Trump has been telling about
himself all along.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that how you
see it?
AMY WALTER: Yes, or that's it's
sort of already
-- to your point, it's already,
like, baked
in, into how voters perceive
him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
AMY WALTER: And the reality is
-- and you
have seen this on the campaign
trail, too
-- you talk to voters about his
issues, whether
it is -- because we have known
for a while
now, thanks to public records,
that there
were years where he didn't pay
taxes.
We know that he had many of his
products outsourced
to foreign companies.
These are the sorts of things
that should
hurt a traditional candidate.
Obviously, somebody like Mitt
Romney was by
making these statements.
TAMARA KEITH: Severely by it.
AMY WALTER: Severely by this.
And yet he still has tremendous
support among
people who see him as a success,
and to the
point that Tam made, that he's
saying the
only person who can destroy the
system, a
rigged system, is somebody who's
benefited
from a rigged system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
quickly about
some of the other stories that
have been out
there about Donald Trump.
Tam, the Associated Press report
today that
the women who work for him on
the reality
TV show "The Apprentice" say
that he used
demeaning remarks against a
number of them,
used sexist language.
Amy, and the ongoing story about
Miss Universe,
that is something that has just
dominated
the news for the last number of
days.
Are we watching -- and then some
polls have
come out showing some damage to
him in some
states.
Is this the kind of thing that
is -- if the
taxes aren't going to resonate,
what about
this?
AMY WALTER: Well, throughout
this campaign,
what we have seen is, wherever
the focus is,
wherever the spotlight is, that
hurts that
candidate.
And so, a couple of weeks ago,
it was about
Hillary Clinton, and it was
about the pneumonia
and the video and the FBI and
the e-mails,
and you saw her numbers sink.
Now we have had a very bad
couple of weeks
for Donald Trump.
His numbers start to get a hit.
And the question, of course, is,
how long
will this continue?
And, more importantly, how long
does Donald
Trump help it continue?
He's done a masterful job
throughout this
campaign of taking a one- or a
two-day bad
story and turning it into a
weeklong terrible
story.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But can you draw
a line, Tamara,
from all this focus on this and
how he's doing?
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, well, I think
that you
can clearly say that the Alicia
Machado story,
the Miss Universe story, and the
story about
"The Apprentice" and the
possible sexual harassment
on the set, that is already
feeding into a
narrative that has existed for a
long time,
that the things that he said on
"The Howard
Stern Show" -- Donald Trump is
not performing
well with women.
He is not performing well with
college-educated
Republican women even, is not
performing as
well as he should be.
So, I think that we can't say
that it hasn't
had an effect.
It seems like there is an
effect.
It's just sort of baked in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're saying it
just feeds
the narrative that's already out
there.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly,
Hillary Clinton
has her own worries, Amy, and
the polls continue
to show difficult getting
younger voters excited,
wanting to vote.
I was just in Georgia this
weekend talking
to a number of young voters who
just say they're
not going to vote, even among
African-Americans.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
I think Hillary Clinton's
biggest challenge
is the fact that she's an emblem
of the status
quo at a time when people
dislike the status
quo more than anything.
And I think her biggest
challenge with younger
voters isn't that she's not
liberal enough,
but it's that she's saying the
system will
be able to solve your problems,
when the very
people she's trying to appeal to
say the system
is rigged and broken.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Tam, her
campaign's aware of this?
TAMARA KEITH: Obviously, they're
aware of
it.
They have been doing a lot of
events that
are targeted at millennials.
Her message is targeted at
millennials.
On Friday, no one noticed
because Donald Trump
tweeted a lot the night before
in the middle
of the night.
But she did a big rollout
related to national
service, which is targeted at
the very hopes
of millennials to give back to
their country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we are
going to
leave it there, a whole lot
going on, six
weeks to go.
Tamara Keith, Amy Walter, thank
you both.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: the latest Nobel Prize
winner in medicine
won for his discoveries in a
process that's
essential to our health, but
complex to explain.
We take a deeper look at the
science behind
his accomplishment on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, as you heard, join
us for special
live coverage of the vice
presidential debate.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.